---
title: The Complification of Simplicity
author: craque
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=985
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
Creating things is a fundamental human activity. In music, it includes many things: composition, instrumentation, preparation, production, performance, presentation, recording, distribution, consumption, listening&#8230; just to name a few. In fact, the expression of a piece of music can very quickly become a complex weave of tree-like dependencies, where many different disciplines &#8211; and humans &#8211; combine to create a unified work.

Over time, technologies advanced quickly, and improvements to the various sub-fields within making a musical work crossed boundaries. The same people who composed were those performing, recording techniques spilled into how to prepare, those presenting found themselves producing. Now, technology enables a single person to encompass the entirety of what it took dozens of people to accomplish 50 years ago &#8211; everything from creation to marketing to dissemination.

The result is a constantly changing industry, for sure, but the interesting essence here is the _shape_ of change. One example that comes to mind is electronic music and the way that computer technology has driven the ability of the individual to control the entire lifecycle. A laptop can be an entire production studio and publication platform. The tools a musician uses to do this have become sufficiently abstracted that an entire world of expertise is no longer required. As the technology advances, it allows more to be done by more, the need for specialization decreases as the opportunity for wider adoption increases.

Our population grows and with it the amount of <g class="gr_ gr\_119 gr-alert gr\_spell gr\_inline\_cards gr\_run\_anim ContextualSpelling" id="119" data-gr-id="119">creation</g>. The nature of distribution and consumption in a heavily networked world means that cross-pollination increases exponentially, and soon we are overcome with such a huge variety of musical output and genre-bending that it becomes impossible to navigate. Even in terms of instrumentation and recording, details become abstracted and devices do a lot of the hard work under the hood.

I liken this to the discipline of distributed computer systems not only because music has gone hand-in-hand with the development of the computer, but also that they share this phenomenon of &#8216;dependent abstraction&#8217;<g class="gr_ gr\_303 gr-alert gr\_gramm gr\_inline\_cards gr\_run\_anim Punctuation multiReplace" id="303" data-gr-id="303">.</g>

Let&#8217;s get concrete. Those with careers as recording and studio engineers have become proportionally few to the increasing number of people making music. That doesn&#8217;t necessarily mean that there is less demand for recording engineers, only that a greater number of musicians are without the need for them as technology enables these people to do it right in their own home. It may not mean you&#8217;re getting the most high-end experience you can, but it&#8217;s definitely good enough to publish.

So what about the computer systems operations engineer? As the cloud and distributed systems become larger, <g class="gr_ gr\_68 gr-alert gr\_gramm gr\_inline\_cards gr\_run\_anim Grammar only-ins replaceWithoutSep" id="68" data-gr-id="68">software</g> has been developed that allows a greater number of people to engage in the activity of application development and distribution. It has abstracted <g class="gr_ gr\_622 gr-alert gr\_gramm gr\_inline\_cards gr\_run\_anim Grammar only-ins replaceWithoutSep" id="622" data-gr-id="622">away</g> the requirement to understand how specific components of the hardware works, for example. Entire complex systems are being delivered &#8220;out-of-the-box&#8221; to run on cloud providers without any need for hiring an ops person, much less a team. While the need for operational expertise is still required, it pales in comparison to the demand for those who can build things on top the groundwork they provide.