    Sources/"Free Improvisation"

Only the professionally or fanatically interested will wade through the
following: the very primitively formatted footnotes of my full paper, and
the sources organized according to how they related to the general arguments
and points I made. The more readable published paper will be available soon.

Documentary bases for definition of terms . "Musication" is Rouget's (1985)
word,
apt for this subject. . I ask the reader's indulgence in my many long
footnotes
and sources from all over the map. Think of the main text as an airplane
ride,
and the footnotes as a view of the ground you see through the plane's
window.
Part of my agenda here is to move my subject from the margins toward the
center
of musicological and interdisciplinary discourses, and to suggest as many
directions and provide as many entry points for future research and
discussion as
possible. More: the "horizontal" breadth of those discourses is matched here
by a
"vertical" temporal line, down to the past and up to the future. In the
music of
my focus (the post-1960s American and European "new and improvised music"
that
emerged from the free jazz movement) examples abound of innovators who
invoke a
past beyond their cognitive reach to guide and inspire their agendas for the
future, and critiques of the present (composer/improviser Anthony Braxton
(Tri-Axium Writings 1-3, Hanover NH: Tree Frog Music, 1988: xiii) calls this
the
"Tri-Axiom:" present mines past for future). . This terminological move, of
course, goes right back to Pythagoras, to whom both the very word for
philosophy
and the logical foundations of Western music are (mythico-historically)
ascribed.
. Such separations come after Pythagoras, from Plato through Boethius, and
should
not be cast aside here before salvaging one of their logical aspects: the
concept
of improvement. One of the advantages of a hierarchical Great Chain of Being
is
the fixity of moral and spiritual standards it implies, holding out a
situable
goal and the hope and means to approach it--the possibility of rising or
falling
from one's "natural" station. Improvisation, in mutation and natural
selection,
is nature's means of self-improvement. The problem that began with Plato and
crystallized in Boethius is the rigid fixing of that hierarchy; it has
proven
truer to phenomena to think of it as "tangled" (per current physics, a
tangled
hierarchy is one in which the criteria and positions of "high" and "low" are
continually negotiated, in flux, exchanged). The relevance of all that here
lies
in the rigidly hierarchical distinction between composers, their
interpreters,
and improvisers, on the one hand; and theorists, on the other. For us, the
relationship between the theorizing about and the making of music, between
the
sophos and the logos, are best understood as an interactive, mutually
nurturing
symbiosis constantly seeking balance, rather than a "high" noumenos and a
"low"
phenomenos. Improvement (and improvidence, in improvisation, musical and
otherwise) is always thus an achievable yet conditional goal in spacetime,
contingent on the state of the cosmic/planetary/human organism (see Jamie
James,
The Music of the Spheres: Music, Science and the Natural Order of the
Universe
[New York: Grove Press, 1993: 11, 74). . Having touched base with
Pythagoras,
Plato, and Boethius, I would do well to relate this enterprise of theory to
a
similar historical root in the microcosm of my discipline.
Ethnomusicological
discourse is very much rooted in 19th-century German philosophy's syntax and
issues; the scientific work of Helmholtz (see Ian Johnston, Measured Tones:
The
Interplay of Physics and Music [New York: Adam Hilger, 1989] provides a
direct
lineage both to the way we ethnos have chosen to analyze and theorize about
the
musics of the world (or, in reaction, the ways we later took care not to)
and to
the way the (mostly) German physicists have chosen to analyze and theorize
about
the universe. If Helmholtz could thus serve as our Pythagoras, his
contemporary
Wagner might be called on as a sort of anti-Plato: an example of the
dangerous
mania music can induce when the universal and individual cease to coinhere
and
become rather incoherent in the aspects that distinguish them from each
other (as
the atomic bomb did with energy and mass). The legacy of Helmholtz and the
other
Berliners has flourished in modern technology, and in the area of music and
theory thereof. This, of course, is the area (of indeterminacy, chance, in
both
musical and physical reality) that has overlapped most interactively with
free
improvisation when the latter cut loose from its "jazz" moorings, especially
in
Europe. And Wagnerism has been through the twentieth-century fire with
Nietszche,
Schsnberg, Hitler and Adorno, and is still present in Stockhausen's "cosmic
music" (his description of his work). In neither Helmholzism nor Wagnerism
are we
yet free of scientism nor destructively grandiose individualism, though
neither
yet have overcome us, thanks to the pliability and submission that fire has
wrought on them, and the power and resilience of the rest of the world. Thus
the
etymological charge of ethno: my discipline's Berlin founders (comparative
musicologists Erich von Hornbostel, Jaap Kunst, Carl Stumpf and others) put
the
living human element back into the study of music in the person of "the
other."
That other induced, painfully, slowly, the consciousness in the West of the
"self" as no more or less than one among many others in the world.
Documentary
bases for definition of free-jazz movement (source of free-improvisation
practice)

. See John Gray's Fire Music: A Bibliography of the New Jazz, 1959Ü1990
(New
York/Westport CT/London: Greenwood Press, 1991) for a comprehensive
bibliography.
. Derek Bailey, Improvisation: Its Nature and Practice in Music (New York:
Da
Capo Press, 1980). . John Litweiler, The Freedom Principle: Jazz After 1958
(New
York: William Morrow, 1984); Ekkehard Jost, Free Jazz (Graz: Universal
Editions,
1974); Joachim Berendt, Ein Fenster aus Jazz: Essays, Portraits, Reflexionen
(Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag, 1986); Phillipe
Carles
and Jean-Louis Comolli, Free Jazz/Black Power (Paris: Champs Libre, 1971);
Ian
Carr, Music Outside (London: Latimer New Dimensions, 1973); Valerie Wilmer,
As
Serious As Your Life: The Story of the New Jazz (London: Quartet Books,
1977);
and Roger T. Dean, New Structures in Jazz and Improvised Music Since 1960
(Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1992), authors variously situated in
time
and place, comprise a well-rounded international (American, Australian, and
Western European) account of this movement's history. Overall, the American
press
has provided much more journalistic ethnography than analysis or theory, the
Europeans and Australians rather the reverse. . My Ph.D. dissertation is on
the
German Free Music Production (FMP), a Berlin-based group formed in 1969 as a
musician's cooperative to produce performances and recordings of freely
improvised music (not exclusively--composition as surrounding context for
improvisation free of its form is in the mix). That original mission has
survived
and matured the group into a seminal international exemplar of the
free-musical
terrain. . See Berendt; Jost, Europas Jazz 1960-1980 (Frankfurt am Main:
Fischer
Taschenbuch Verlag, 1987); and Bert Noglik, "EuropSische Jazz-Avantgarde:
Emanzipation wohin?" (Jazzforschung, Vol. 11, 1979, 165-195) for the
contemporary
German accounts of this.

Literature on improvisation

. See David Sudnow, Ways of the Hand: Organization of Improvised Conduct
(Cambridge/London: MIT Press, 1978); Jeff Pressing, "Improvisation: Methods
and
Models" (in John Sloboda, ed., Generative Processes in Music, Oxford
University
Press, Oxford, 1988, 129-78); Paul Berliner, Thinking in Jazz: The Infinite
Art
of Improvisation (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1994);
and
Edward T. Hall, "Improvisation as an Acquired, Multilevel Process"
(Ethnomusicology, Vol. 36 No. 2, Spring/Summer, 1992) for a sense of this
discourse emerging over time. . See Burton Peretti, The Creation of Jazz:
Music,
Race, and Culture in Urban America (Urbana and Chicago: University of
Illinois
Press, 1992); Albert Murray, The Hero and the Blues (University of Missouri
Press, 1973); and Stanley Crouch, The All-American Skin Game, or, The Decoy
of
Race: The Long and Short of It, 1990-1994 (New York: Pantheon Books, 1995).
. See
Ben Sidran, Black Talk (New York: Da Capo Press, 1981). . See Robin Moore,
"The
Decline of Improvisation in Western Art Music: An Interpretation of Change"
(IRASM, 23:1, 1992); and John Rink, "Schenker and Improvisation" (Journal of
Music Theory, Vol. 37, No.1, 1993, 1-54). . Dean; Hans Kumpf, Postserielle
Musik
und Free Jazz: Wechelswirkungen und Parallelen: Berichte, Analysen,
Werkstattgesprache (2nd ed. Rohrdorf: Rohrdorfer Musikverlag, 1981); and
Dietrich
Noll, Zur Improvisation im Deutschen Free Jazz: Unters, zur Asthetik frei
improvisierter Klangflachen (Imburg: Verlag der Musikalienhandlung Wagner,
1977)
provide good surveys and assessments of various current compositional
approaches
that incorporate, even centralize, improvisation. . Though analytical work
on
improvisation, especially in conventional jazz studies, is more plentiful.
Dean
and Gary Potter, "Analyzing Improvised Jazz" (College Music Symposium, Vol.
32,
1992, 143-160), and their bibliographies are two of several good entry
points to
this work. . Larry Solomon, "Improvisation (1)" (in "Forum: Improvisation,"
Perspectives of New Music, September, 1982: 71-78). . The few remaining
include
some unpublished Ph.D. dissertations and a few journal issues giving more
space
than usual to mostly informal, some specialized (e.g., improvisation and
silent
film accompaniment, or instrument- or method-specific issues), discussion.
To
them we can add anecdotal and prescriptive pages by authors Larry Austin,
Eddie
Provost, Keith Rowe, Derek Bailey, Lee Kaplan, Vinny Golia, John Silber,
Davey
Williams, Malcolm Goldstein, and Pauline Oliveros in "Forum: Improvisation,"
cited with Solomon's remarks above; Ratt*'s (1996) assertion of free
improvisation as a genus rather than a reactive eschewal of musical form;
Nunn's
(1996) grounding of the process in "physical/behavioral" and "perceptual
context
determinants," musical time, ideation, "the intelligent body" (skilled motor
activity), and intra-group interaction to bring a state of musical
"unpredictability" to a critical mass of inevitability; and Hovacsek's
(1996)
manipulations of cognitive-psychological tenets to explain musically
improvised
elements such as repetition, "deprivation," and "flooding/familiarity." .
Parry-Lord (1930, 1932), which inspired applications of similar "formulism"
to
other traditions (such as Kernfeld's [1983] to Coltrane). . Pressing
singles out
Bergson as most relevant to the issue of improvisation: "Bergson saw
intuition as
a way to attain direct contact with a prime reality ordinarily masked from
human
knowledge" (149). Other recent music studies have drawn on German
phenomenology
(Noll, Ferrara [1991] and Friedson [1996] on Husserl and Heidegger) and
neurobiology (several on Edelmann, 1992) in the construction of theoretical
platforms. . Sloboda's three generative processes--performance,
improvisation,
composition--line up respectively with Hall's reptilian, mammalian, and
human
brains. The social darwinism such delineation has provoked in intercultural
history is obvious, but the faithfulness of the linkage to individual human
organisms is the point here. All brains, all cultures, can embody both sets
of
three. . Bailey (1980: 140), recounting a panel discussion of prominent
free
improvisers, writes that "the predominant view to emerge was that there is
no
such thing as improvisation, or, if there is, it is indistinguishable from
composition." But then he asserts that "in any but the most blinkered view
of the
world's music, composition looks to be a very rare strain, heretical in both
practice and theory. Improvisation is a basic instinct, an essential force
in
sustaining life. Without it nothing survives. As sources of creativity they
are
hardly comparable." Think of the truth of this survival factor in the
examples of
the African diasporic cultures in the West, and of the cultural renewal free
improvisation has served in the Europe. On the other hand, as Frederick
Rzewski
asserted in a recent talk at Wesleyan University, improvisation and
composition
hardly seem like different expressions of the same brain processes when you
consider composition as a literate process devised to grasp and fix musical
events and experiences that are intrinsically elusive to the oral/aural
process
of improvisation, even of improvisations prescribed by the compositional
process.
. Moore's (1992) picture of the improvisation practiced by the European
aristocracy before their fall to the bourgeoisie corroborates this. . This
is
Nunn's (see footnote 18) term. . Translated by David Noakes and published
in 1956
as Jazz--its Evolution and Essence.

Documentary bases for narrative of literacy

. Stravinsky's composerly use of improvisation is described in Boris
Asaf'yev's A
Book About Stravinsky (UMI Research Press: Ann Arbor MI, 1982: 226). Boulez
articulates fully his problem with improvisation in Jacques Attali's Noise:
The
Political Economy of Music (Minneaoplis: University of Minnesota Press,
1977:
145-46), essentially expressing the critique of it this question suggests.
That
critique ripples throughout the literature on other composers and of critics
as
various as Stravinsky, Boulez, and Theodor Adorno, "Perennial Fashion--Jazz"
(Prisms, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1963); John Cage (in David Revill, The
Roaring
Silence: John Cage: A Life, New York: Arcade Publishing, 1992: 158-59),
Karlheinz
Stockhausen (in Robert Morgan, Twentieth-Century Music, New York: W.W.
Norton &
Co., 1991: 417), Anthony Davis (in Dean, 143), and Anthony Braxton (in Dean,
133). The common gist of their various complaints comes from the assumption
that,
either always or sometimes, process' purpose is product (at least) as much
as
expression or communication, and that composition is the only way to turn
process
into product (or even, we might add, product into process, in the case of
composition for improvisers, or even, considering Glenn Gould and the
Beatles,
for recording rather than concert artists). See, to counter all this, Bailey
for
Steve Lacy's demonstrative argument to Frederick Rzweski for improvisation
as
itself a product made by one who eschews as a crutch the intermediate
process
called composition to make music. . In physics, a closed system is one that
needs
no energy from outside it to operate it (a plant is an open system, since it
needs light; the regulation of heat in a thermostatically controlled house
is a
closed one because the house's own internal fluctuations of temperature turn
the
heat on and off). All closed systems are "local," or limited in definition,
since
everything ultimately feeds on everything else (the house's furnace needs
fuel);
but the question of whether the universe itself is closed (eternally
oscillating
between expansion and collapse) or open (per David Bohm, Wholeness and the
Implicate Order [London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980], the "explication"
of an
"implicate order") is still an open one in science. Manfred Miller, "Free
Jazz:
Eine New Thing Analyse" (Jazz Podium [May], 128-130; [June], 156-159;
[July],
182-184, 1966) uses these physics of general entropy and "local" formations
of
order therefrom as reflective of free-music making, and to similar social
dynamics, in a move to ground free improvisation in a veritable biological
and
social imperative, as opposed to the abstract one of an inherited paradigm.
Indeed, he posits free-music makers as the heralds, even progenitors, of a
new,
utopian society, one with roots (proclaimed by the music) in tribal shamanic
cultures, and fruits appropriate to same in the Millennial visions of
Western
theologians such as Teilhard de Chardin. . This and other citations of
Braxton
come from both my longstanding working relationship with him and recur
throughout
his many published interviews. . And, a propo of the narrative of literacy
and
its etymologies, it was the Judeo-Christian West that came up, through the
"people of the book" (ancient Israel), with shekinah--the presence of
transcendent
spirit in matter and culture--and then with "the Word made Flesh," in the
Incarnation. This myth is the very picture of the closing of the system
between
physis and spiritus, unto a balanced equality of immanence and transcendence
(indeed, very much like a thermostat). . The invocation of Augustine
augments the
previous footnote's introduction of our subject's historically framed
religious
mythos, summed up pithily by Catherine Le M*e, Chant: The Origin, Form,
Practice
and Healing Power of Gregorian Chant (New York: Bell Tower, 1994). Her
depiction
of the Medieval monastery as an expression (literacy's) of just this kind of
freedom confronts and informs us exactly as does, say, the Sun Ra Arkestra,
which
was also a (orality's) freely congregated collective whose music was a
centerpiece embedded in a mission-from-God context. (Both assemblages,
incidentally, have exhibited similar vulnerabilities--to a descent into
cult--issuing from a blurring and imbalance between the immanent and
transcendent,
and between the timeless universal and its timely expressions.) Le M*e's
emphasis
on vocal expression as sacrifice and vulnerability complements Attali's and
Michel Foucault's ("Nietzsche, Genealogy, History," Michel Foucault:
Language,
Counter-Memory, Practice, ed. Donald Bouchard, Ithaca: Cornell University
Press,
1977) view of it as violence and power (more on which ahead); her discussion
of
"theodidactic" (God-taught) music training pertains directly to free
improvisation. Many free improvisers, from the time of John Coltrane on,
describe
the music as prayer to a transcendent intelligence (see David Such,
Avant-Garde
Jazz Musicians: Performing 'Out There,' [Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press,
1993: 117-24]), something that effects the healing and health of the
cosmic/planetary/human organism, something that grounds and tunes that
organism.
The silence from which plainchant continually rises and falls is close in
concept
to the use of silence surrounding both post-Cageian chance operations, and
their
service to "divine influences" (Revill, 90) and post-AACM (Braxton's Chicago
training ground, the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians),
especially the British, free improvisers (see Carr). . But their
relationship
does deserve some attention. To Bailey's and Rzweski's comments (see
footnote 22)
consider Fran*ois-Bernard Mäche's points (in Music, Myth, and Nature or The
Dolphins of Arion (University of Edinburgh: Harwood Academic Publishers,
1992:
25) about the ease with which sequencer/synthesizer/computer technology
allows
the free improviser to capture and then rework his improvisations as
compositions. Attali sees composition (133Ü48) as the most promising site of
music practice, but the case he makes for it would hold as much air if the
word
"composition" were replaced by "improvisation." These examples all show this
paradoxical drawing and blurring of distinctions between the two. . This
citation
by Gilbert Rouget, Music and Trance: A Theory of the Relations Between Music
and
Possession (Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, 1985, 268) of the
twelfth-century Arabic writer on Sufism, Ghazzali, resonates with footnote
34:
"'It is in him who loves God and has a passion for Him and longs to meet
Himand
no sound strikes upon his ear but he hears it from Him and in Him,' that
music
gives rise to wajd," (trance; emphasis mine). My emphasis underscores the
freedom
to as much as from sounds. Thus Braxton and Evan Parker can sound like two
lyrical cool-jazz players duetting spontaneously in a fresh boppish style
for one
free improvisation, then like two serialist performers for another, then
play
with their own unique saxophone vocabularies for a third. They are as free
to
converse (and to extemporize) in a language they love as they are to create
a new
one in that same love (creativity). . See Willi Apel, The Notation of
Polyphonic
Music 900Ü1600 (Cambridge MA: The Medieval Academy of America, 1961: 88). .
Apel's account of this is taken up in historical and contemporary texts.
Gary
Tomlinson, Music in Renaissance Magic: Toward a Historiography of Others
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993) shows clearly that both musical
texts and practices were still deeply embedded in the context of "the
unforseen"
(magic); pedagogical texts such as those by Johann Quantz (On Playing the
Flute,
New York: Schirmer Books, 1985) and Leopold Mozart (A Treatise on the
Fundamental
Principles of Violin Playing, London, New York: Oxford University Press,
1951)
evince the analytical bent away from that context that would culminate in
Romanticism's formalism, extending through the doctrine of "the work" into
projects such as Schenker's and Boulez'. . See Carl Dahlhaus, Foundations
of
Music History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 4, for the rise
of
this reification of "the work," and Moore and Rink for the concurrent
decline of
improvisation in the West. . Foucault; Gary Tomlinson, "Ideologies in Aztec
Song"
(JAMS, 48/3, 1995, 343-79); Leo Treitler, Music and the Historical
Imagination
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989); and Hayden White, Tropics of
Discourse: Essays in Cultural Criticism (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University
Press, 1978) give a sense of how the narrative of literacy functioned during
the
19th and lingers in the 20th century as the vehicle of hegemonic power. .
These
are Wilfrid Mellers' (A Darker Shade of Pale: A Backdrop to Bob Dylan, New
York:
Oxford University Press, 1985, Chapter One) terms for the cultures of
literacy
and orality. . The literature alluding to all this includes discourses
loosely
and broadly tagged "postmodernist," "postcolonialist," "negritude,"
"whiteness;"
its two great manifestations in music/music scholarship include 1) the
American
redirection of the narrative of literacy through its geographical remove
from the
rest of the West and its closer mix of diverse peoples (e.g., Mellers' Music
in a
New Found Land, New York: Hillstone, 1964), and 2) the rise of the
African-American musical traditions through their own national to the
international (especially Western European) arenas, a rise that documents
reappropriation of literacy's devices for the purposes of orality, and
(incidentally) a reintroduction of improvisation to the West on its own
terms,
successfully reinstating it not only as a component of "low" culture but
confounding the hierarchy between low and high introduced by the narrative
of
literacy in the first place (see Reid Badger, "James Reese Europe and the
Prehistory of Jazz" [American Music, Spring 1989, 48-66]; Susan Cook, "Jazz
as
Deliverance: The Reception and Institution of American Jazz during the
Weimar
Republic" [American Music, Spring 1989, 30-47]; Michael Kater, "Forbidden
fruit?
Jazz in the Third Reich" [The American Historical Review, Vol. 94, Feb.
1989,
11-43]; J. Bradford Robinson, "Zur 'Jazz'-Rezeption der Weimarer Periode:
Eine
stilhistorische Jagd nach einer Rhythmus-Floskel," in ed. Wolfram Knauer,
Jazz
und Komposition, Jazz-Institut Darmstadt, Germany, 1991, 11-25]; Scott
DeVeaux,
"The Emergence of the Jazz Concert, 1935Ü1945" [American Music, Spring 1989,
6-31]; and Noglik for a sense of the power of this African-American coup in
Western strongholds as diverse as America and Germany throughout the first
half
of the century; and Crouch and Kumpf for the extent of that power since).
Documentary bases for narrative of the marriage of literacy and orality

. Tomlinson's (1993) Foreword establishes his "hermeneutics" as drawn from
the
work of Riceouer and Gadamer, and his "archaeology" from that of Foucault.
Ludwik
Bielawski, "History in Ethnomusicology" (Yearbook for Traditional Music 17,
1985:
8-15), posits a full seven different conceptions/representations of time and
history to go with our conventional linear chronology, including a
"composition
and performance" time zone and zones peculiar to the speeds of sound and
light. .
See J. Nigro Sansonese, The Body of Myth: Mythology, Shamanic Trance, and
the
Sacred Geography of the Body (Rochester VT: Inner Traditions International,
1994)
for a brilliant affirmation of this model, one that brings new theoretical
life
to the already lively postulations about revelations of the archaic in
innovation
made by our recent and current improvisers and composers, such as Cage,
Harry
Partch, Alvin Lucier, Oliver Messiaen, Leo Smith, George Lewis, and Anthony
Braxton. Paul Connerton, How Societies Remember (Cambridge [England]/New
York:
Cambridge University Press, 1989), persuasively posits the collectively
interactive and synergetic consciousness of many such bodies as constituting
and
constituted by memory and intent even at those moments when they
deliberately try
to make a complete break with a past and to construct willfully and launch
upon a
new present and future. . Ed. Joscelyn Godwin, Cosmic Music: Musical Keys
to the
Interpretation of Reality (Rochester, Vt.: Inner Traditions, 1989). . In
other
words, musica humana, the realm of Sansonese, Rouget, and Ernest McClain,
The
Myth of Invariance: The Origin of the Gods, Mathematics and Music from the
Rg
Veda to Plato (Boulder & London: Shambhala, 1978); and musica mundana, that
of
Mäche and Murray Schafer, The Tuning of the World: Toward a Theory of
Soundscape
Design (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1980). . Basil
Davidson,
"The Ancient World and Africa: Whose Roots?" (Race and Class, XXIX 2, 1987);
and
Terrence McKenna, Food of the Gods: The Search for the Original Tree of
Knowledge: A Radical History of Plants, Drugs, and Human Evolution (New
York:
Bantam Books, 1994). . Barbara Walker, The Woman's Encyclopedia of Myths
and
Secrets (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1983). . Diana Deutsch, "Paradoxes of
Pitch" (Scientific American, August, 267, 1992, 88Ü90); Harry Powers, "The
Genesis of Language and Music" (Ethnomusicology 36, 1992, 147Ü70); John
Blacking,
How Musical is Man? (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1993); Charles
Suhor, "Jazz Improvisation and Language Performance: Parallel Competencies"
(Etc.
43: 133-40, Summer, 1986). See also Rouget's chapter on opera, and James
(123)
for the suggestion that different musical phenomena such as
Schsnberg'ssprechstimme, African-American, and ancient bardic declamation
all
evince these links. . Dudley Young, Origins of the Sacred: The Ecstasies of
Love
and War (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1991). . As the study of "chaos" by
physicists demonstrates so powerfully in the "butterfly effect," that of a
butterfly's wings in China on the weather system over North America.
Documentary
references in statement of theory of free improvisation . St. Anselm's
"proof" of
the existence of God was that there was something rather than nothing. Cage
discovered this in the sound of his own organism's "silence" when in a
diachronic
chamber free of sounds external to it (see James Pritchett, The Music of
John
Cage [Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993: 75]). . See
Richard
Woodward, "A Rage Supreme" (Village Voice, Aug. 9, 1994); Kevin Whitehead,
"Death
to 'the Avant-Garde'" (Village Voice, March 21, 1995); and Ronald Radano,
"Jazz
Recast" (in his New Musical Figurations: Anthony Braxton's Cultural
Critique,
Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press, 1993, 269Ü76) for a sense of
the
Lincoln Center controversy. . Theodor Adorno, Philosophy of Modern Music
(New
York: The Seabury Press, 1973; and Leonard Bernstein, The Unanswered
Question
(The Norton Lectures [Columbia M4X 33032]).

Sources

Adorno, Theodor. 1963. "Perennial Fashion--Jazz." In Prisms. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Adorno, Theodor. 1973. Philosophy of Modern Music. New York: The Seabury
Press.
Apel, Willi. 1961. The Notation of Polyphonic Music 900Ü1600. Cambridge MA:
The Medieval Academy of America.

Attali, Jacques. 1977. Noise: The Political Economy of Music. Minneaoplis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Badger, R. Reid. 1989. "James Reese Europe and the Prehistory of Jazz."
American Music, Spring 48-66.
Bailey, Derek. 1980. Improvisation: Its Nature and Practice in Music. New
York: Da Capo Press.

Berendt, Joachim Ernst. 1986. Ein Fenster aus Jazz: Essays,
Portraits, Reflexionen. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Fischer Taschenbuch
Verlag.
Bernstein, Leonard. 1973. The Unanswered Question. The Norton Lectures
(Columbia M4X 33032).

Bielawski, Ludwik. 1985. "History in Ethnomusicology." Yearbook for
Traditional Music 17: 8-15.

Blacking, John. 1993. How Musical is Man? Seattle:
University of Washington Press.

Bohm, David. 1980. Wholeness and the Implicate
Order. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Brown, Lee B. 1991. "The Theory of Jazz
Music 'It Don't Mean a Thing . . .'" The Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism.
49:2 Spring.

Carles, Phillipe and Comolli, Jean Louis. 1971. Free Jazz/Black
Power. Paris: Champs Libre.

Carr, Ian. 1973. Music Outside. London: Latimer New
Dimensions.

Clarke, Eric F. 1992. "Improvisation, Cognition and Education." In
Paynter, John; Howell, Tim; Orton, Richard; and Seymour, Peter (eds.).
Companion
to Contemporary Musical Thought, Vol. 2. London and New York: Routledge:
787-802.
Cook, Susan C. 1989. "Jazz as Deliverance: The Reception and Institution of
American Jazz during the Weimar Republic." American Music, Spring: 30-47.

Crouch,
Stanley. 1995. The All-American Skin Game. New York: Pantheon Books.
Dahlhaus,
Carl. 1983. Foundations of Music History. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Davidson, Basil. 1987. "The Ancient World and Africa: Whose Roots?" Race and
Class, XXIX 2.

Dean, Roger T. 1992. New Structures in Jazz and Improvised Music
Since 1960. Philadelphia: Open University Press.

Deutsch, Diana. 1992. "Paradoxes
of Pitch." Scientific American, August, 267:88Ü90.

DeVeaux, Scott. 1989. "The
Emergence of the Jazz Concert, 1935Ü1945." American Music, Spring, 6-31.

Edelman,
Gerald M. 1992. Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind.
HarperCollins.

Ferrara, Lawrence. 1991. Philosophy and the Analysis of Music.
Westport CT: Greenwood Press.

Foucault, Michel. 1977. "Nietzsche, Genealogy,
History." In Michel Foucault: Language, Counter-Memory, Practice. Ed. Donald
Bouchard. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Friedson, Stephen. 1996. The Dancing
Prophets: Musical Experience in Tumbuka Healing. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. Gioia, Ted. 1987. "Jazz: The Aesthetics of Imperfection." The
Hudson Review Vol. 39, Winter: 585-600.

Gray, John. 1991. Fire Music: A
Bibliography of the New Jazz, 1959Ü1990. New York/Westport CT/London:
Greenwood
Press.

Hall, Edward T. 1992. "Improvisation as an Acquired, Multilevel Process."
Ethnomusicology Vol. 36, No. 2, Spring/Summer.

Hanslick, Eduard. 1885/1974. The
Beautiful in Music. New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Co.

Hovancsek, Mike.
1996."Cognitive Disruption Theory." the improvisor. Vol. XI, March: 79-82.
James,
Jamie. 1993. The Music of the Spheres: Music, Science and the Natural Order
of
the Universe. New York: Grove Press.

Johnston, Ian. 1989. Measured Tones: The
Interplay of Physics and Music. New York: Adam Hilger.

Jost, Ekkehard. 1974. Free
Jazz. Graz: Universal Editions.

Jost, Ekkehard. 1987. Europas Jazz 1960-1980.
Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag.

Kater, Michael H. 1989. "Forbidden
fruit? Jazz in the Third Reich." The American Historical Review, Vol. 94,
Feb.
11-43.

Keil, Charles M. H. 1995. "The Theory of Participatory Discrepancies: A
Progress Report." Ethnomusicology Vol. 39, Winter: 1-19, 73-100.

Kernfeld, Barry.
1983. "Two Coltranes." Annual Review of Jazz Studies 2. New Brunswick NJ:
7-66.
Kumpf, Hans. 1981. Postserielle Musik und Free Jazz: Wechelswirkungen und
Parallelen: Berichte, Analysen, Werkstattgesprache. 2nd ed. Rohrdorf:
Rohrdorfer
Musikverlag.

Le M*e, Katharine. 1994. Chant: The Origin, Form, Practice and
Healing Power of Gregorian Chant, New York: Bell Tower.

Lewis, George E. 1996.
"Improvised Music After 1950: Afrological and Eurological Perspectives."
Black
Music Research Journal, Vol. 16, Spring: 91-122.

Litweiler, John. 1984. The
Freedom Principle: Jazz After 1958. New York: William Morrow.

Mäche,
Fran*ois-Bernard. 1992. Music, Myth, and Nature or The Dolphins of Arion.
University of Edinburgh: Harwood Academic Publishers.

McClain, Ernest G. 1978.
The Myth of Invariance: The Origin of the Gods, Mathematics and Music from
the Rg
Veda to Plato. Boulder & London: Shambhala.

McKenna, Terrence. 1994. Food of the
Gods: The Search for the Original Tree of Knowledge: A Radical History of
Plants,
Drugs, and Human Evolution. New York: Bantam Books.

Mellers, Wilfrid. 1964. Music
in a New Found Land. New York: Hillstone.

Mellers, Wilfrid. 1985. A Darker Shade
of Pale: A Backdrop to Bob Dylan . New York: Oxford University Press.

Miller,
Manfred. 1966. "Free Jazz: Eine New Thing Analyse." Jazz Podium (May ):
128-130;
(June): 156-159; (July): 182-184. Moore, Robin. 1992. "The Decline of
Improvisation in Western Art Music: An Interpretation of Change." IRASM
(23:1).
Mozart, Leopold (1719-1787). 1951. A treatise on the fundamental principles
of
violin playing. London, New York: Oxford University Press.

Murray, Albert. 1973.
The Hero and the Blues. University of Missouri Press.

Noglik, Bert. 1987.
"Aktuelle Aspekte der Identitat von Jazz und 'Improvisierter Musik' in
Europa:
Differenziertes Selbstverstandnis und Internationalisierung." Jazzforschung,
Vol.
19, 177-86.

Noglik, Bert. 1979. "Europaeische Jazz-Avantgarde: Emanzipation
wohin?" Jazzforschunq, Vol. 11: 165-195.

Noll, Dietrich J. 1977. Zur
Improvisation im Deutschen Free Jazz: Unters, zur Asthetik frei
improvisierter
Klanaflachen. Imburg: Verlag der Musikalienhandlung Wagner.

Nunn, Tom. 1996. "A
Theoretical Framework for Free Improvisation." the improvisor. Vol. XI,
March:
72-78.

Paynter, John; Howell, Tim; Orton, Richard; and Seymour, Peter (eds.).
1992. Companion to Contemporary Musical Thought, Vol. 2. London and New
York:
Routledge.

Peretti, Burton W. 1992. The Creation of Jazz: Music, Race, and
Culture in Urban America. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Powers, Harry. 1992. "The Genesis of Language and Music," Ethnomusicology
(36:147Ü70).

Pritchett, James. 1993. The Music of John Cage. Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press.

Quantz, Johann Joachim (1697-1773). 1985. Versuch
einer Anweisung die Flste traversiere zu spielen. New York: Schirmer Books.
Ratt*, Michel. 1996. "R*interpr*ter l'improvisation musicale:
L'improvisation
comme forme." Musicworks. No. 66, Fall: 25-35.

Revill, David. 1992. The Roaring
Silence: John Cage: A Life. New York: Arcade Publishing.

Robinson, J. Bradford.
1991. "Zur 'Jazz'-Rezeption der Weimarer Periode: Eine stilhistorische Jagd
nach
einer Rhythmus-Floskel." In Knauer, Wolfram, ed., Jazz und Komposition,
Jazz-Institut Darmstadt, Germany, 11-25.

Rouget, Gilbert. 1985. Music and Trance:
A Theory of the Relations Between Music and Possession. Chicago/London:
University of Chicago Press.

Sansonese, J. Nigro. 1994. The Body of Myth:
Mythology, Shamanic Trance, and the Sacred Geography of the Body. Rochester
VT:
Inner Traditions International.

Schafer, Murray. 1980. The Tuning of the World:
Toward a Theory of Soundscape Design. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania
Press.

Schopenhauer, Arthur. The World as Will and Representation. New York:
Dover Publications, 1966.

Sloboda, John A. (ed.). 1988. Generative Processes in
Music: the Psychology of Performance, Improvisation, and Composition.
Oxford:
Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press.

Such, David G. 1993.
Avant-Garde Jazz Musicians: Performing 'Out There'. Iowa City: University of
Iowa Press.

Sudnow, David. 1978. Ways of the Hand: Organization of Improvised
Conduct. Cambridge/London: MIT Press.

Tomlinson, Gary. 1993. Music in Renaissance
Magic: Toward a Historiography of Others. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Treitler, Leo. 1989. Music and the Historical Imagination. Cambridge:
Harvard
University Press.

Various authors. 1982. Childs, Barney and Hobbs, Christopher,
eds. "Forum: Improvisation." Perspectives of New Music, September.

White, Hayden.
1978. Tropics of Discourse: Essays in Cultural Criticism. Baltimore: The
Johns
Hopkins University Press.

Whitehead, Kevin. 1995. "Death to 'the Avant-Garde.'"
Village Voice, March 21.

Wilmer, Valerie. 1977. As Serious As Your Life: The
Story of the New Jazz. London: Quartet Books.

Woodward, Richard. 1994. "A Rage
Supreme." Village Voice, Aug. 9.

Young, Dudley. 1991. Origins of the Sacred: The
Ecstasies of Love and War. New York: St. Martin's Press.

"Corresponding Literature" (Fig. 3) The literature corresponding to the top
level (1) is that about
free jazz as developed by African-American artists in the 1950sÜ60s and
picked up
by Europeans in the late '60s/early '70s (see Gray). I draw from these
sources
and my own fieldwork and journalism on free players, and from the articles
and
books about specific artists and groups. Whatever I propose for a theory,
whatever I say along the way in formulating it, whatever sources from other
disciplines I deem pertinent--and however that--is in the light of the
logical-mythical information within these sources. The third level, of fewer
and
larger circles, denotes ancient systems and practices with which we have no
longer a direct connection but which still influence us explicitly through
the
documentation that survives about them, as it resonates with or speaks to
our own
current experiences; or implicitly, through vestiges and branches still
alive in
current music. Examples are Western Medieval chant and later modal
polyphony,
pre-Melakarta Indian music, pre-colonial gamelan, ancient Greek (from
Pythagoras
to Boethius), ancient Egyptian and Asian traditions as gleaned from texts
and
pictures. Other sources: Le M*e (on Western chant), Rouget (on ancient
Israel,
Greece, and Arabia), Godwin and James (on the specifically musicosophical
perennial traditions of Western "speculative music").
